README.md, before:

# sanity-plugin-page-tree

> This is a **Sanity Studio v3** plugin.

## Why?
In many example projects for headless CMSs in general, they typically create a post content type with a property like "slug" and serve the post on a route such as `/posts/:slug`. This becomes more complex when dealing with multiple page types and a desire to establish a dynamic page tree.

Consider having three different content types: a home page, an overview page, and a content page, and aiming to create the following URL structure:

- `/` Homepage
- `/about-us` Overview Page
- `/about-us/team` Content Page
- `/what-we-do` Content Page
- `/what-we-do/cases` Overview Page
- `/what-we-do/cases/:slug` Content Page

Achieving this can be challenging, especially if all the slugs need to be dynamic and editable in the CMS. This package aims to make this easy by providing a page tree view for creating and editing pages. It also includes a page tree input for creating internal page links and methods designed for use on the frontend, helping you effectively resolve urls to ids (in order to retrieve the right content for a route) and vice versa (to resolve internal page links to urls).

## Installation

```sh
npm install sanity-plugin-page-tree
```

## Usage

### Create a page tree config
Create a shared page tree config file and constant to use in your page types and desk structure.

```ts
// page-tree-config.ts
import { PageTreeConfig } from 'sanity-plugin-page-tree';

export const pageTreeConfig: PageTreeConfig = {
  /* Root page schema type name */
  rootSchemaType: 'homePage',
  /* Array of all page schema type names */
  pageSchemaTypes: ['homePage', 'contentPage'],
  /* Api version to be used in all underlying Sanity client use */
  apiVersion: '2023-12-08',
};
```

### Create a page type
The `definePageType` function can be used to wrap your page schema types with the necessary fields for the page tree.

#### Root page (e.g. home page)
Provide the `isRoot` option to the definePageType function to mark the page as a root page.

```ts
// schemas/home-page.ts
import { pageTreeConfig } from './page-tree-config';

const _homePageType = defineType({
  name: 'homePage',
  type: 'document',
  title: 'Page',
  fields: [
    // ...
  ],
});

export const homePageType = definePageType(_homePageType, pageTreeConfig, {
  isRoot: true
});
```

#### Other pages (e.g. content page)

```ts
// schemas/content-page.ts
import { pageTreeConfig } from './pageTreeConfig';

const _contentPageType = defineType({
  name: 'contentPage',
  type: 'document',
  title: 'Page',
  fields: [
    // ...
  ],
});

export const contentPageType = definePageType(_contentPageType, pageTreeConfig);
```

### Add page tree to desk structure
Instead of using the default document list for creating and editing pages, you can use the `createPageTreeDocumentList` function to create a custom page tree document list view and add it to your desk structure.

```ts
// desk-structure.ts
import { pageTreeConfig } from './page-tree-config';

export const structure = (S: StructureBuilder) =>
  S.list()
    .title('Website')
    .items([
        S.listItem()
          .title('Pages')
          .child(
            createPageTreeDocumentList(S, {
              config: pageTreeConfig,
              extendDocumentList: builder => builder.id('pages').title('Pages').apiVersion(pageTreeConfig.apiVersion),
            }),
          )
      ]
    )
```

### Create internal page links
A link to an internal page is a reference to a page document. The `PageTreeField` component can be used to render a custom page tree input in the reference field.

```ts
import { pageTreeConfig } from './page-tree-config';

const linkField = defineField({
  name: 'link',
  title: 'Link',
  type: 'reference',
  to: pageTreeConfig.pageSchemaTypes.map(type => ({ type })),
  components: {
    field: props => PageTreeField({ ...props, config: pageTreeConfig }),
  },
});
```

## License

[MIT](LICENSE) © Q42

## Develop & test

This plugin uses [@sanity/plugin-kit](https://github.com/sanity-io/plugin-kit)
with default configuration for build & watch scripts.

See [Testing a plugin in Sanity Studio](https://github.com/sanity-io/plugin-kit#testing-a-plugin-in-sanity-studio)
on how to run this plugin with hotreload in the studio.

Commit message:

Add examples to README.md

README.md, after:

# sanity-plugin-page-tree

> This is a **Sanity Studio v3** plugin.

## Why?
In many example projects for headless CMSs in general, they typically create a post content type with a property like "slug" and serve the post on a route such as `/posts/:slug`. This becomes more complex when dealing with multiple page types and a desire to establish a dynamic page tree.

Consider having three different content types: a home page, an overview page, and a content page, and aiming to create the following URL structure:

- `/` Homepage
- `/about-us` Overview Page
- `/about-us/team` Content Page
- `/what-we-do` Content Page
- `/what-we-do/cases` Overview Page
- `/what-we-do/cases/:slug` Content Page

Achieving this can be challenging, especially if all the slugs need to be dynamic and editable in the CMS. This package aims to make this easy by providing a page tree view for creating and editing pages. It also includes a page tree input for creating internal page links and methods designed for use on the frontend, helping you effectively resolve urls to ids (in order to retrieve the right content for a route) and vice versa (to resolve internal page links to urls).

## Installation

```sh
npm install sanity-plugin-page-tree
```

## Usage

### Create a page tree config
Create a shared page tree config file and constant to use in your page types and desk structure.

```ts
// page-tree-config.ts
import { PageTreeConfig } from 'sanity-plugin-page-tree';

export const pageTreeConfig: PageTreeConfig = {
  /* Root page schema type name */
  rootSchemaType: 'homePage',
  /* Array of all page schema type names */
  pageSchemaTypes: ['homePage', 'contentPage'],
  /* Api version to be used in all underlying Sanity client use */
  apiVersion: '2023-12-08',
};
```

### Create a page type
The `definePageType` function can be used to wrap your page schema types with the necessary fields for the page tree.

#### Root page (e.g. home page)
Provide the `isRoot` option to the definePageType function to mark the page as a root page.

```ts
// schemas/home-page.ts
import { pageTreeConfig } from './page-tree-config';

const _homePageType = defineType({
  name: 'homePage',
  type: 'document',
  title: 'Page',
  fields: [
    // ...
  ],
});

export const homePageType = definePageType(_homePageType, pageTreeConfig, {
  isRoot: true
});
```

#### Other pages (e.g. content page)

```ts
// schemas/content-page.ts
import { pageTreeConfig } from './pageTreeConfig';

const _contentPageType = defineType({
  name: 'contentPage',
  type: 'document',
  title: 'Page',
  fields: [
    // ...
  ],
});

export const contentPageType = definePageType(_contentPageType, pageTreeConfig);
```

### Add page tree to desk structure
Instead of using the default document list for creating and editing pages, you can use the `createPageTreeDocumentList` function to create a custom page tree document list view and add it to your desk structure.

```ts
// desk-structure.ts
import { pageTreeConfig } from './page-tree-config';

export const structure = (S: StructureBuilder) =>
  S.list()
    .title('Website')
    .items([
        S.listItem()
          .title('Pages')
          .child(
            createPageTreeDocumentList(S, {
              config: pageTreeConfig,
              extendDocumentList: builder => builder.id('pages').title('Pages').apiVersion(pageTreeConfig.apiVersion),
            }),
          )
      ]
    )
```

### Create internal page links
A link to an internal page is a reference to a page document. The `PageTreeField` component can be used to render a custom page tree input in the reference field.

```ts
import { pageTreeConfig } from './page-tree-config';

const linkField = defineField({
  name: 'link',
  title: 'Link',
  type: 'reference',
  to: pageTreeConfig.pageSchemaTypes.map(type => ({ type })),
  components: {
    field: props => PageTreeField({ ...props, config: pageTreeConfig }),
  },
});
```

## Examples
For full examples, see the following projects:

- [Clean studio](./examples/studio)
- [Studio with document internationalization](./examples/studio-i18n)

## License

[MIT](LICENSE) © Q42

## Develop & test

This plugin uses [@sanity/plugin-kit](https://github.com/sanity-io/plugin-kit)
with default configuration for build & watch scripts.

See [Testing a plugin in Sanity Studio](https://github.com/sanity-io/plugin-kit#testing-a-plugin-in-sanity-studio)
on how to run this plugin with hotreload in the studio.
